docs: new postgresql management guide (#3864)
cal-itp/benefits: docs/guides/postgresql.md

Author: my thinking is that it is helpful turning the transition, but that we can/should nuke the 'container-apps' subdirectory after the cutover is complete.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I see the value? We have to remember to move all the docs _and_ update any links, like in the release issue. We know this is the way forward and we aren't that far off... I'd say just go for it.

Author: no argument here 🤙

# PostgreSQL management

## Create a backup

> When benefits was hosted as an application service, we downloaded a copy of the django.db sqlite file to backup the db prior to deploying new migrations.

Reviewer 2: Trivial copyediting suggestions: 

```suggestion
When Benefits was hosted as an application service, we downloaded a copy of the `django.db` SQLite file to backup the database prior to deploying new migrations.
```

> Now we generate a .json export from PostgreSQL by running the command below from the container app console (accessible via Azure > Container App > Monitoring > Console).

Reviewer 2: Worth adding this for extra clarity?

```suggestion
Now we generate a .json export from PostgreSQL by running the command below from the container app console (accessible via Azure > Container App > Monitoring > Console). (Use the `web` container app, not `pgadmin`.)
```

Author: its a worthwhile callout. the double parentheses bother me so i prefaced the entire guide with additional explanation to try and make it crystal clear how to access the correct console.

Reviewer 2: I like it!

> Now we generate a .json export from PostgreSQL by running the command below from the container app console (accessible via Azure > Container App > Monitoring > Console).

Reviewer 3: Maybe we can also say to choose `bash` since that's what the dev container runs? It probably won't happen, but just to minimize the chances of some script working fine in the dev container but not in the Container App.

```bash
python manage.py dumpdata --natural-foreign --natural-primary --indent=2 --output db_data.json
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Maybe we can add a bit more here saying that the console puts you in `/calitp/app` and so `db_data.json` is saved to `/calitp/app`. But that it can also be copied to the file share by doing something like `cp db_data.json /home/calitp/app/data/`. Then the `.json` file can be downloaded from the Azure Portal in case we need to.

<img width="1738" height="472" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cd4bb065-319c-4ca7-924b-773c3cb42839" />

Author: i decided to create a dedicated section called [Copy a backup](https://benefits-3864--cal-itp-previews.netlify.app/guides/postgresql/#copy-a-backup). let me know what you think of it.

!!! info

    `--natural-foreign` and `--natural-primary` are used to avoid serialization issues with the permission and authentication Django objects.

## Restore from a backup

In order to restore from a .json backup, the commands below need to be run from the container app console (accessible via Azure > Container App > Monitoring > Console).

```bash
# blows away the existing db and runs migrations
python manage.py ensure_db --reset

# seeds data from the json backup
python manage.py loaddata db_data.json
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Similar to the comment above, we could say that you can copy files from the file share by using `cp /home/calitp/app/data/db_data_tmp.json .`, if needed.

But you know, @jgravois, now that I think about it some more, the main thing I wanted to highlight is that if you need to move any file out of the Container App, or into the Container App, you can copy to/from `/home/calitp/app/data/` since that is where [`web-storage` is mounted](https://github.com/cal-itp/benefits/blob/main/terraform/modules/application/locals.tf#L2). That could be a note or something like that, just to remind us that the file share is available for managing backup files. So then the `Create a backup` and `Restore from a backup` sections can stay concise like you have them now.

Author: see https://github.com/cal-itp/benefits/pull/3864#discussion_r3574530566

## Monitor server health

> The Overview page for Azure Database for PostgreSQL flexible server contains a variety of helpful charts to visualize the health of the hosted DB.

Reviewer 2: This is such a terrible service name that it makes these docs harder to read. Would it be better to generalize it?

```suggestion
The database server's overview page contains a variety of helpful charts to visualize the health of the hosted DB.
```

Could maybe also add 'You can find this by searching for the "Azure Database for PostgreSQL flexible servers" service and choosing an environment's database.'

(Replicate on later mentions of the service name, too, if you agree.)

Author: > Could maybe also add 'You can find this by searching for the "Azure Database for PostgreSQL flexible servers" service and choosing an environment's database.'

i wanted to stay consistent in how i referenced azure services and their internal tabs, but i agree the service name is a confusing mouthful so i decided to mention it once (in quotes) and use 'database service' as an alias consistently everywhere else.

![PostgreSQL health](img/postgresql-health.png)

## Restart the server

The Overview page for Azure Database for PostgreSQL flexible server makes it possible to <kbd>↻ Restart</kbd> the db server.

## Provision

> Provisioning for the db server is codified via [terraform][]. We currently use the Burstable compute tier with 32 GiB storage capacity and 3GiB RAM. See the [azurerm documentation](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/azurerm/latest/docs/resources/postgresql_flexible_server) for more information on configuring this service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Provisioning for the db server is codified via [terraform][]. We currently use the Burstable compute tier with 32 GiB storage capacity, 1 vCore, and 2 GiB RAM. See the [azurerm documentation](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/azurerm/latest/docs/resources/postgresql_flexible_server) for more information on configuring this service.
```

> Provisioning for the db server is codified via [terraform][]. We currently use the Burstable compute tier with 32 GiB storage capacity and 3GiB RAM. See the [azurerm documentation](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/azurerm/latest/docs/resources/postgresql_flexible_server) for more information on configuring this service.

Reviewer 3: Super minor edit, looks like it's 2GiB RAM.

## Upgrade

> We currently target PostgreSQL 17.x. When the time comes for a major version upgrade, the Overview page for Azure Database for PostgreSQL flexible server offers helpful utlities for both [validating and upgrading the database](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/postgresql/configure-maintain/how-to-perform-major-version-upgrade?tabs=portal-major-version-upgrade).

Reviewer 2: Suggest removing this line that's likely to get forgotten when we upgrade and isn't really critical to understanding the docs. Plus a spelling correction.

```suggestion
When the time comes for a major version upgrade, the Overview page for Azure Database for PostgreSQL flexible server offers helpful utilities for both [validating and upgrading the database](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/postgresql/configure-maintain/how-to-perform-major-version-upgrade?tabs=portal-major-version-upgrade).
```

Author: great idea.

Generally we expect that the steps will be as follows:

> 1. Perform a dry-run upgrade in azure to confirm that the db passes "Pre-upgrade validation"

Author: i'm not suggesting we migrate anytime soon, but as of today, we are definitely a candidate for an in-place PostgreSQL 18.x upgrade. 👼 

<img width="1098" height="1101" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/39445f9a-b725-41bf-b82d-b1272a61a342" />

1. Test locally with PostgreSQL 18.x to verify appropriate behavior in the application

> 1. Update `azurerm_postgresql_flexible_server` in [terraform][] and `terraform apply` to trigger the actual upgrade.

Reviewer 2: Not to say we have to document it here, but I think we may need to restore the data or jump through other hoops if we upgrade it this way?

- [Updating version of Azure Database for PostgreSQL flexible server from 12 to 16 through terraform deleted all data in DB](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/answers/questions/5509042/updating-version-of-azure-database-for-postgresql)
- [PostgreSQL Major Version Upgrades on Azure: A Terraform-based Approach](https://blog.binaryrepublik.com/2026/01/postgresql-major-version-upgrades-on.html)

Might be better to use the UI to upgrade it and then import the new config into Terraform?

Author: i wasn't aware of this gotcha. i've updated the step by step outline.
